EDBT 2017
20th International Conference on Extending Database Technology (2017)
March 21-24, 2017, Venice, Italy
 	Reviews For Paper
Track	Research (Short Papers)
Paper ID	274
Title	Towards sequenced semantics for evolving graphs

Masked Reviewer ID:	Assigned_Reviewer_1
Review:	
Question	 
Relevance: Is this Paper relevant to EDBT?	Yes
Correctness: Is this paper technically correct?	Yes.
Originality: Are the ideas and solutions of the paper novel?	High - the paper has highly novel contributions.
Presentation: Is the paper readable and the content presented well?	Fair - the presentation has minor issues and should be improved. However, overall the presentation is acceptable.
Impact: What is likely to remain of this paper after the conference?	High - the paper will be a foundation for future work or commercialization and likely be cited by many.
Strong Points: Please list the three strong points of the paper:	S1) Very relevant research problem
S2) Novel way to represent evolving graphs
S3) The paper uses a clear language and is generally well written
Weak points: Please list the three weak points of the paper:	W1) The technical part in Sec. 3 and 4 would benefit from making better use of the running example.
W2) Sec. 4 is a rather informal discussion
Review summary: Please summarize the contributions of the paper, comment on its novelty, presentation, and impact and rationalize your overall rating:	This paper proposes a new model for storing evolving graph. Instead of storing a sequence of snapshot graphs, each node and edge in the graph are associated with a validity time interval. The new model has a number of advantages, especially in a distributed setting.

The paper is well motivated, has a novel contribution, and might open interesting research directions in the area of evolving graphs. The paper is generally well presented. In the technical part, some more details would be appreciated.
Detailed Comments: Please provide detailed comments (concerns, errors, typos, open issues, missing related work, etc.) to the authors:	D1) The motivation and problem setting in the introduction are convincing.

D2) The discussion of related work is very detailed, which is generally good. However, to save a bit space for the technical part, it could be a bit more compressed.

D3) In Sec. 3 and 4, I suggest to better integrate and use the running example.

D4) Sec. 4 would in my opinion benefit if it is a bit more formal, and the important aspects are better highlighted.

D5) In Def. 3.1, the letter $a$ in $A^V(v,p,a)$ is not explained.

D6) In the paragraph "Sequenced semantics over partitioned data" in Sec. 4: $vid=2$ is not introduced before, hence not clear to the reader.

D7) Fig. 3(b): Why are the timestamps of the partition removed? Shouldn't they be stored together with the original timestamps?
Confidence: How confident are you in the quality of your review?	Medium - I am familiar with the area.
Overall Rating	Accept - I will support acceptance of this paper.
Masked Reviewer ID:	Assigned_Reviewer_2
Review:	
Question	 
Relevance: Is this Paper relevant to EDBT?	Yes
Correctness: Is this paper technically correct?	Yes.
Originality: Are the ideas and solutions of the paper novel?	Low - the paper has few or no novel contributions.
Presentation: Is the paper readable and the content presented well?	Fair - the presentation has minor issues and should be improved. However, overall the presentation is acceptable.
Impact: What is likely to remain of this paper after the conference?	Low - the paper will not have signidicant impact on furthering the field.
Strong Points: Please list the three strong points of the paper:	Querying evolving graphs is an interesting and importnat problem.
Weak points: Please list the three weak points of the paper:	Limited contribution (see detailed comments below)
Review summary: Please summarize the contributions of the paper, comment on its novelty, presentation, and impact and rationalize your overall rating:	
The paper discusses graphs that evove over time. The authors suggest storing the evolving graph in a relational database where nodes, edges are annotated with their validity time. Then, they discuss how to distibute the graph.
In my opinion, the novelty/contribution is limited (see detailed comments below).
Detailed Comments: Please provide detailed comments (concerns, errors, typos, open issues, missing related work, etc.) to the authors:	The paper considers graphs that change over time.

In my opinion, the novelty/contribution of the paper is limited.

The proposed data model is a simple, natural representation of an evolving graph that has been used in previous research. For example, a similar one (called version graph) where each node/edge is annotated with its lifespan (i.e., validity time) was proposed in [*], where lifespan is modeled as a set of intervals to allow deletes and re-inserts. 

The section in partitioning is quite informal; it reads more like some notes on previous papers on the topic. The problem of partitioning an evolving graph considering both structural and temporal locality has been thoroughly studied in [16]; it is unclear to me what the authors propose and how it related to their previous work in [22].

In section 3, the the authors assume that the graph is stored in a relational database. How does this affect their discussion regarding distribution, what is the computational model?

[*] Konstantinos Semertzidis, Evaggelia Pitoura, Kostas Lillis: TimeReach: Historical Reachability Queries on Evolving Graphs. EDBT 2015: 121-132
Confidence: How confident are you in the quality of your review?	High - I am an expert in the area of the paper.
Overall Rating	Weak Reject - I would prefer this paper being rejected, but will not fight for rejection.
Masked Reviewer ID:	Assigned_Reviewer_3
Review:	
Question	 
Relevance: Is this Paper relevant to EDBT?	Yes
Correctness: Is this paper technically correct?	Yes.
Originality: Are the ideas and solutions of the paper novel?	Medium - some aspects of the work are novel.
Presentation: Is the paper readable and the content presented well?	Fair - the presentation has minor issues and should be improved. However, overall the presentation is acceptable.
Impact: What is likely to remain of this paper after the conference?	Medium - the paper is incremental and/or will have limited impact with respect to citations or follow-up work.
Strong Points: Please list the three strong points of the paper:	S1) Well-motivated problem
S2) Promising model, founded in state-of-the-art of relational temporal processing
S3) concise description of challenges for distributed temporal graph processing
Weak points: Please list the three weak points of the paper:	W1) Certain parts rather opaque for anybody not active in this area
W2) Scope of temporal graph operators and their specific challenges not really described
W3) Results and conclusion quite preliminary 
Review summary: Please summarize the contributions of the paper, comment on its novelty, presentation, and impact and rationalize your overall rating:	The authors of this paper propose to improve processing of temporal graphs by a fine-grained temporal model (lifetime intervals on nodes, edges and attributes) as well as sequenced semantics for the operations. This will allow richer temporal semantics and align this work with the current state-of-the-art in temporal databases. The idea is quite promising and the sketch of the work presented in this paper looks sound. 

It is not clear to me what types of graph-temporal query workloads the authors envision, given the broad range of such operations (e.g., the authors never talk about temporal paths). As a results. the authors do not address what the impact of these types have in terms of expressiveness and computational complexity – even in the centralized case

Furthermore, the paper suffers from some presentation issues, making it difficult to understand. In particular, the description of Figure 3 and the 4-relation model rather hard to follow for anybody who is not familiar with the area.
Detailed Comments: Please provide detailed comments (concerns, errors, typos, open issues, missing related work, etc.) to the authors:	see 8
Confidence: How confident are you in the quality of your review?	High - I am an expert in the area of the paper.
Overall Rating	Weak Accept - I would not mind this paper being accepted, but will not fight for acceptance.


 
